Add EIP-5299: Storage scaling pattern (#5299)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-5299.md

discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-9000-layer3-scaling-standard/9039
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2021-07-18
requires: 2535
---

## Abstract
Upgrading a storage layout is required in case of a complex project if it is re-architected. The EIP introduces dynamic storage slots, which can be upgraded without deploying a new contract.

## Motivation
With the existing smart contract upgradable design patterns available, while it’s possible to upgrade the code implementation, it is not possible to completely upgrade the storage structure, which requires a re-deployment of the contracts.

From the end-user perspective, it is annoying to migrate from an old version of an app to a new version, especially if it requires deploying multiple transactions.

## Specification
This EIP is an extension of [EIP-2535](./eip-2535.md), adding a mechanism that maintains the old data points while updating the implementation.

### Layer3 scaling standard
For upgrading a storage structure we will store the slot addresses in a special struct we will call it ParentStorage and then retrieve the slot whenever the specific facet interacts with data store.

> Here is a simple example that shows dynamic slot based storage and its use in one of the implementation contract:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a simple example that shows dynamic slot based storage and its use in one of the implementation contract:

```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```solidity
```

        bytes32 storagePosition = keccak256("parent.storage");
        // Set the position of our struct in contract storage
        assembly {ps.slot := storagePosition}
    }

    // Returns the struct from a specified position in contract storage
    // as is short for AppStorage
    function appStorageV1() internal pure returns(AppStorageV1 storage as) {
        // The identifier must be unique for a implementation contract
        bytes32 storagePosition = keccak256("app.storage.implContractA.V1");
        assembly {as.slot := storagePosition}
    }
}

// Our implementation contract uses the Parent Storage defined above along with the implementation contract specific storage
contract ImplContractAV1 {
    function setDataA(bytes32 _dataA) external {
        LibA.ParentStorage storage ds = LibA.parentStorage();
        LibA.AppStorageV1 storage as = LibA.appStorageV1();
        require(ds.owner == msg.sender, "Must be owner.");
        as.dataA = _dataA;
    }

    function getDataA() external view returns (bytes32) {
        LibA.AppStorageV1 storage as = LibA.appStorageV1();
        return as.dataA;
    }
}
```

> Now that we have unique slot position for our implementation contract in place, we will modify the storage structure and introduce a new slot position for the same and upgrade the contract by using a function which will add the new function from below implementation contract. The function updates the mapping of function selector to implementation contract address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Now that we have unique slot position for our implementation contract in place, we will modify the storage structure and introduce a new slot position for the same and upgrade the contract by using a function which will add the new function from below implementation contract. The function updates the mapping of function selector to implementation contract address.

```

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```solidity
```

        assembly {as.slot := storagePosition}
    }

    // Returns the struct from a specified position in contract storage
    // as is short for AppStorage
    function appStorageV2() internal pure returns(AppStorageV2 storage as) {
        bytes32 storagePosition = keccak256("app.storage.implContractA.V2");
        assembly {as.slot := storagePosition}
    }
}

// Our implementation contract uses the Parent Storage defined above along with the implementation contract specific storage
contract ImplContractAV2 {
    function setDataAV2(uint256 _dataA) external {
        LibB.DiamondStorage storage ds = LibA.parentStorage();
        LibB.AppStorageV2 storage as = LibA.appStorageV2();
        require(ds.owner == msg.sender, "Must be owner.");
        as.dataA = _dataA;
  }

    function getDataAV2() external view returns (uint256) {
        LibB.AppStorageV2 storage as = LibA.appStorageV2();
        return as.dataA;
    }

    function getDataAV1AndV2() external view returns (bytes32, uint256) {
        LibB.AppStorageV1 storage as1 = LibA.appStorageV1();
        LibB.AppStorageV2 storage as2 = LibA.appStorageV2();
        return (as1.dataA, as2.dataA);
    }
}

```

> With above implementation, we will have access to both AppStorageV1 and AppStorageV2 which can be used either for migration or used in conjunction as per the use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Implied.

## Rationale

> In order to make the upgrade process as smooth and seamless possible it is mandatory to keep all the components involved in a system as modular as possible. Hence the upgradable storage structure will prove to be very helpful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
WIP
```

A rationale explains design decisions made in the Specification (e.g. why a function is named like it is, why a specific type is used instead of another, etc...)

While it is a required section, placeholders for this specific section are common enough that I would no longer consider having a full Rationale necessary for an EIP to be merged as Draft.

## Backwards Compatibility
This standard makes scaling smart contract storage compatible with the future standards & functionality because the storage slots can be added dynamically to enable storage expansion, while also facilitating a means to retrieve and store data across various legacy & in-production storage contracts.

## Test Cases

> Test cases are included in the reference implementation refer to Layer3-scaling-standard repository in 0xHashstack's github account

Reviewer: Must be put in the assets folder.

## Reference Implementation

> Refer to Layer3-scaling-standard repository in 0xHashstack's github account

Reviewer: Must be put in the assets folder.

## Security Considerations

> A storage selector clash occurs when two different storage slot address points to the same location. This has the unintended consequence of overriding data which is unintentional. This scenario is not possible with the diamondCut function prescribed in ([EIP-2535](./eip-2535.md)), because it uses the contract address of facets to generate the slot address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A storage selector clash occurs when two different storage slot addresses point to the same location. This has the unintended consequence of overriding data. This scenario is not possible with the `diamondCut` function described in ([EIP-2535](./eip-2535.md)), because it uses the contract address of facets to generate the slot address.
```

---
eip: 5299

> title: Layer3 scaling pattern

Reviewer 2: While we normally don't curate EIP titles, I'm a bit uncomfortable with this title given how widely used the term `Layer 2` is in the Ethereum ecosystem, and calling this `Layer 3 Scaling` may imply to the reader that this is some kind of overarching design pattern we are working toward rather than a mechanism for dealing with contract storage.

Also, the name doesn't seem at all related to what this EIP actually purports to do (contract upgrade pattern).

Author: Thanks for your comments on our Ethereum Improvement Proposal. Everyone is entitled to their opinion irrespective of its relevance, or wisdom.

If you have specific feedback on the proposed design short-comings, such as probable oversights, or edge cases that the developers might have overseen, me & my team of developers are happy to look into it.

If you have trouble understanding the scale & scope of value such a simplistic looking design pattern could bring to the ecosystem, you can look at Uniswap v1,v2,v3 as an example of the world that's deprived of this EIP. If you still have trouble, i'd happy to connect with you over a call, or probably a twitter space even to dissect the proposal in greater detail.

Reviewer 2: As editors, it is our job to ensure that content in new EIPs is appropriate content for an EIP.  We also work to ensure that EIPs follow fairly consistent standards and practices as much as possible.  While I can appreciate that many people think that the scope of EIPs should be broader than what it currently is (standards), at the moment this repository is primarily for standards, not design patterns and best practices.

Reviewer: I agree with micah here.

description: A primitive to facilitate eternal upgradeability of smart contracts, by making storage slots dynamic.
author: Vinay Kumar (@v9hstk), Pratik Agarwal (@Prtk418)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-9000-layer3-scaling-standard/9039
status: Draft

> type: Standards Track
> category: ERC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type: Informational
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not a fan of turning `Informational` EIPs into a "collection of Best Practices and Good Ideas".  At best, we'll end up with a mix of some good ideas, and some bad ideas since we don't have any means of curation (nor do I think editors should get into the game of Good Idea curation).

Author: > ```suggestion
> 
> type: Informational
> 
> ```

Please refer to the implementation examples provided in the assets. 

The key value add this design pattern enables is to induce composability in the storage structure, a key missing component in all the upgradable patterns. 

I will add additional implementation references describing storage scalability in low level upgradable patterns.

Author: @MicahZoltu Thanks for your comments on our Ethereum Improvement Proposal. Everyone is entitled to their opinion irrespective of its relevance, or wisdom.

If you have specific feedback on the proposed design short-comings, such as probable oversights, or edge cases that the developers might have overseen, me & my team of developers are happy to look into it.

If you have trouble understanding the scale & scope of value-add such a simplistic looking design pattern could bring to the ecosystem, you can look at Uniswap v1,v2,v3 as an example of the world that's deprived of this EIP. All upgradable patterns today enable functional and/or logic upgradability. By solving for storage scalability, we are able to make upgradable patterns lot more composable and enable a means to truly scale smart contracts.

 If you still have trouble, I'm happy to connect with you over a call, or probably a twitter space even, to dissect the proposed EIP in greater detail.

created: 2021-07-18
requires: 2535
---

## Abstract
Upgrading a storage layout is required in case of a complex project if it is re-architected. The EIP introduces dynamic storage slots, which can be upgraded without deploying a new contract.

## Motivation
With the existing smart contract upgradable design patterns available, while it’s possible to upgrade the code implementation, it is not possible to completely upgrade the storage structure, which requires a re-deployment of the contracts.

From the end-user perspective, it is annoying to migrate from an old version of an app to a new version, especially if it requires deploying multiple transactions.

> ## Specification

Reviewer 3: Thank you for the EIP! Please consider complete the spec section, otherwise it's hard for readers to understand what kind of practice / interface this EIP proposes other people to follow.

This EIP is an extension of [EIP-2535](./eip-2535.md), adding a mechanism that maintains the old data points and enabling the possibility to update the structure of storage struct while updating the implementation.

### Layer3 scaling standard
For upgrading a storage structure we will store the slot addresses in a special struct we will call it ParentStorage and then retrieve the slot whenever the specific facet interacts with data store.

> Here is a simple example that shows dynamic slot based storage and its use in one of the implementation contract:

Reviewer 2: I don't see an actual specification here.  The majority of this section appears to be an example implementation (which should go in the `## Reference Implementation` section) but no actual specification exists at the moment and that is required for an EIP.

---
eip: 5299
title: Layer3 scaling pattern
description: A primitive to facilitate eternal upgradeability of smart contracts, by making storage slots dynamic.
author: Vinay Kumar (@v9hstk), Pratik Agarwal (@Prtk418)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-9000-layer3-scaling-standard/9039
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2021-07-18

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
requires: 2535
---
```

Requires is a misnomer; it should be named references.

## Abstract

> Upgrading a storage layout is required in case of a complex project while it’s re architected. The EIP introduces implementation of dynamic storage slots, which can be upgraded to a new one in case of an upgrade. Without actually deploying a new contract altogether.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgrading a storage layout is required in case of a complex project if it is re-architected. The EIP introduces dynamic storage slots, which can be upgraded without deploying a new contract.
```

## Motivation

> With the existing smart contract upgradable design patterns available, while it’s possible to upgrade the code implementation, it is not possible to completely upgrade storage structure. Which leads to re deploying the contracts and introduces a new version of the app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the existing smart contract upgradable design patterns available, while it’s possible to upgrade the code implementation, it is not possible to completely upgrade the storage structure, which requires a re-deployment of the contracts.
```

> From end user perspective, it is a friction to migrate from old version of app to a new version because of multiple transactions involved

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the end-user perspective, it is annoying to migrate from an old version of an app to a new version, especially if it requires deploying multiple transactions.
```

> What if we could use the old storage in conjunction with the new storage structure, or we could migrate a user data to newer structure very easily in a single transaction.
> 
> With the implementation of this EIP, it would become very convenient to upgrade storage which is a huge problem currently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Specification

> The specification is an addition to the standard ([EIP-2535](./eip-2535.md)) diamond standard design which focuses on putting forward a way for implementing upgradable contracts where the implementation logic is modular where the parts of a contract can be added/replaced/removed while leaving other parts alone. But when it comes to upgrading the storage structure we need a mechanism so that we can maintain the old data points as well and update the implementation in a way that its backward compatible by using the deprecated storage and either migrate to newer storage or utilise both the deprecated storage and the upgraded one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This EIP is an extension of [EIP-2535](./eip-2535.md), adding a mechanism that maintains the old data points while updating the implementation.
```

> Before diving into specifics about the storage upgradability, let’s understand how diamond standard works.
> 
> ### How diamond standard works
> The exposed contract stores within it a mapping of function selector to implementation contract address. When an external function is called on the exposed contract its fallback function is executed. The fallback function finds which implementation contract has the function that has been called and then executes that function from the implementation contract using delegatecall. The exposed contract’s fallback function and delegatecall enable the contract to execute implementation contract’s external function as its own external function. The msg.sender and msg.value values do not change and only the exposed contract’s storage is read and written to.
> 
> The exposed contract can use a function to add/replace/remove any number of functions from any number of implementation contract in a single transaction. This function updates the mapping of function selector to implementation contract address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Not needed. Readers should have already read EIP-2535
